{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2870
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Bold;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww22540\viewh12440\viewkind0
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs40 \cf2 Custom Memory Allocator\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs26 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 A custom memory allocator means writing your own replacement for malloc, free, and realloc which are the functions C programs use to grab and release heap memory. Normally these are provided by the C standard library (glibc), but you're going to implement the same functionality yourself, at a lower level, talking directly to the operating system.\
Here's why this is worth your time: when you call malloc(24), a huge amount of machinery kicks in behind the scenes \'97 finding a free block of the right size, splitting it if it's too big, tracking what's allocated, handling thread safety, and eventually giving the memory back to the OS when it's freed. Most programmers never think about this. Building it yourself forces you to understand the heap, pointers, and memory layout at a level that's genuinely rare for an undergrad to have hands-on experience with.\
Let me walk through each week.\
Week 1 \'97 Foundation & memory model\
The first thing to understand is how a program actually gets memory from the OS. There are two syscalls you'll care about: \ul \strokec2 sbrk,\ulnone \strokec2  which grows or shrinks a single continuous region (the "break"), and \ul \strokec2 mmap\ulnone \strokec2 , which can request memory anywhere in the address space, in page-sized chunks. You'll start with sbrk because it's simpler to reason about \'97 one growing region \'97 and add mmap later for large allocations.\
The core data structure is a block header: a small struct placed right before every chunk of memory you give out, storing the block's size, whether it's free, and pointers to the next/previous block (so you can walk the heap like a linked list). When someone calls your malloc(size), you walk this list looking for a free block big enough, return a pointer just past the header, and mark it used. By the end of the week, you want the simplest possible version working end to end: request memory from the OS once, carve it into blocks, and satisfy basic allocations using the first free block you find (first-fit).\
Week 2 \'97 Three allocation strategies\
Once basic allocation works, the interesting engineering problem is: which free block do you choose? First-fit (take the first one big enough) is fast but causes fragmentation over time. Best-fit (search all free blocks, take the tightest match) reduces wasted space but is slower since it scans everything. The buddy system is a different approach entirely \'97 memory is split into power-of-two sized blocks, and when you free a block, it can merge ("coalesce") with its "buddy" if that's also free, which makes coalescing very fast at the cost of some internal waste.\
This week is also when you implement coalescing for your first-fit/best-fit allocator: when you free a block, check if its neighbours in memory are also free, and merge them into one bigger block. Without this, your heap fragments into useless tiny pieces almost immediately. You'll also want a solid test suite here \'97 allocate, free in different orders, allocate again, and verify you're not corrupting the heap.\
Week 3 \'97 Thread safety & realloc\
Real allocators get called from multiple threads simultaneously, so you need to protect your block list with a mutex \'97 otherwise two threads could corrupt your linked list by modifying it at the same time. This is a good opportunity to learn about lock granularity: one global lock is simple but kills performance under contention; per-region locks are faster but harder to get right. For a portfolio project, a single global lock is a reasonable and honest choice \'97 just explain the trade-off in your README.\
realloc is more subtle than people expect. If the block is shrinking, you can usually just adjust it in place. If it's growing, first check whether the next block in memory happens to be free and big enough to absorb \'97 that avoids a costly copy. Only if that fails do you allocate a fresh block, copy the data over, and free the old one. You also need to handle the edge cases that crash real programs: realloc(NULL, size) should behave like malloc, realloc(ptr, 0) should behave like free, and a free on an already-freed pointer (double-free) should be detected and rejected rather than silently corrupting memory.\
Week 4 \'97 Benchmarking harness\
This is where the project goes from "working" to "provably good." You'll write a benchmark suite that generates allocation patterns \'97 bursts of random-sized allocations, mixed alloc/free sequences simulating real program behaviour \'97 and runs them against both your allocator and glibc's. You're measuring two things: throughput (operations per second) and fragmentation (how much memory is wasted relative to what's actually in use).\
The honest result is that glibc will likely beat you on raw throughput \'97 it's had decades of optimisation. That's fine and expected; the value isn't in beating glibc, it's in understanding why it wins and being able to explain the trade-offs your simpler design makes. This data becomes the centrepiece of your README and the thing you'll talk about in interviews.\
Week 5 \'97 Polish & documentation\
Generate charts from your benchmark data (a simple Python script with matplotlib reading your CSV output works well). Write a README that doesn't just say what the project does, but explains your design decisions: why you chose buddy system alongside first/best-fit, what the fragmentation trade-offs were, what you'd do differently with more time. This narrative is what makes a recruiter actually read the project instead of skimming the file list. Record a short terminal demo (asciinema or a simple screen recording) showing the benchmark running. Tag a v1.0 release on GitHub so it looks like a finished, deliberate piece of work rather than an abandoned repo.\
By the end, you'll have working C you can speak fluently about in a systems-programming interview \'97 which is exactly the kind of depth that's hard to fake.\
}